index.md, before:

---
layout: home
---

* TOC
{:toc}

<br>

## Personnel and Logistics

**Lectures (A1):** Tuesdays and Thursdays, 3:30pm -- 4:45pm<br>
**Location:** STH B19 (745 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A2:** Fridays, 10:10pm -- 11:00am<br>
**Location:** IEC B10 (888 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A3:** Fridays, 11:15am -- 12:05pm<br>
**Location:** MUG 205 (771 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A4:** Fridays, 12:20pm -- 1:10pm<br>
**Location:** CGS 315 (871 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A5:** Fridays, 1:25pm -- 2:15pm<br>
**Location:** CGS 315 (871 Commonwealth Ave)

**Instructor(s):**
{% for person in site.data.people.instructors %}
- {{ person.name }}{% if person.email %} ({{ person.email }}){% endif %}
  {% if person.office %}- Office: {{ person.office }}{% endif %}
  {% if person.office_hours %}- Office Hours: {{ person.office_hours }}{% endif %}
{% endfor %}

**Teaching Assistants:**
{% for person in site.data.people.teaching_assistants %}
- {{ person.name }}{% if person.email %} ({{ person.email }}){% endif %}
  {% if person.office %}- Office: {{ person.office }}{% endif %}
  {% if person.office_hours %}- Office Hours: {{ person.office_hours }}{% endif %}
{% endfor %}

**Course Assistants:**
{% for person in site.data.people.course_assistants %}
- {{ person.name }}{% if person.email %} ({{ person.email }}){% endif %}
  {% if person.office %}- Office: {{ person.office }}{% endif %}
  {% if person.office_hours %}- Office Hours: {{ person.office_hours }}{% endif %}
{% endfor %}



## Course Description

In this course students will gain an understanding of the fundamentals in deep learning and then apply those concepts in exercises and applications in python. We’ll start with the origins of artificial neural networks, learn about loss functions, understand gradient descent, back propagation and various training optimization techniques. Students will be familiar with canonical network architecture such as multi-layer perceptions, convolutional neural networks, recursive neural networks, LSTMs and GRU, attention and transformers. Through explanations, examples and exercises students will build intuition on how deep learning algorithms work and how they are implemented in popular deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch. Students will be able to define, train and evaluate deep learning models as well as adapt deep learning frameworks to new functionality.  Students will gain exposure to pre-trained large language models and other foundation models and the concepts of few-shot learning and reasoning. Finally, students will be able to apply many of the techniques they learned in a final class project.

## Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:

1. Grasp foundational theories and practices in the deep learning arena.
2. Design and implement various neural network architectures using Python and PyTorch.
3. Employ regularization, optimization, and advanced training techniques to enhance model performance.
4. Analyze real-world datasets, applying suitable deep learning techniques to derive actionable insights.
5. Understand the benefits and drawbacks of various neural architectures in specific contexts.
6. Understand the pros and cons of pre-trained large language and other foundation models and how best to employ them
7. Complete a data-centric project, showcasing end-to-end deep learning implementation.

## Prerequisites
Python Programming – Should be proficient in python and associated data science packages,
or studiously working towards proficiency. See for example
[Scientific Python Lectures](https://lectures.scientific-python.org/index.html) for lessons on python language and relevant packages, or
[The Python Tutorial](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/index.html) for a tutorial on the core
language. 

Packages such as NumPy [NumPy - Learn](https://numpy.org/learn/)  and 
SciPy ([SciPy User Guide](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/tutorial/index.html#user-guide)
have tutorials and documentation as well. 

The more proficient you are, the more effective you will be at the assignments and projects. We will dedicate some discussion sessions to ensure your environment is setup correctly and review some of the basics as well as answer any questions.

Math Proficiency – In order to understand the foundational concepts, it is important to have proficiency in a number of areas of mathematics. These include linear algebra, first year calculus and trigonometry as well as some concepts from Real Analysis. We will cover these concepts in the class and some recitation sessions, but refreshing or building your foundation will help.

## Reference Material

The primary textbook for this course will be 
[Understanding Deep Learning](https://udlbook.github.io/udlbook/), by Simon Prince . 
The book is available online as a preprint and should be available in print from 
MIT Press in early 2024.

We’ll also reference 
[Introduction to Linear Algebra, Sixth Edition (2023)](https://math.mit.edu/~gs/linearalgebra/ila6/indexila6.html), by Gilbert Strang.

Lecture notes, consisting primarily of Jupyter notebooks will be posted online as well. 

Given the fast moving nature of this area, we’ll also be citing many articles available online as well as other online reference materials in each lecture. As part of the class, we will guide the students in constructing their own bibliography and give tips on how to efficiently and effectively read research papers.

## Computing Environment

Students are of course free to use their own personal computer, but you will also have access to Boston University’s Shared Computing Cluster and GPUs. Access instructions will be provided. For more information, see:
* [Shared Computing Cluster : TechWeb : Boston University](https://www.bu.edu/tech/support/research/computing-resources/scc/) 
* [GPU Computing : TechWeb : Boston University](https://www.bu.edu/tech/support/research/software-and-programming/programming/multiprocessor/gpu-computing/)

## Learning Management Software

* [Piazza]({{ site.data.urls["piazza"].url }})
* [Gradescope]({{ site.data.urls["gradescope"].url }})

## Course Requirements

### Homework and Projects

- In the first half of the course, there will be weekly assignments to reinforce the key concepts and coding patterns.
Homework assignments will generally be posted on Mondays and due Wednesday the following week.
- In the second half of the course, there will be biweekly projects to implement the bigger concepts covered in lecture and build deeper hands-on experience.
Projects will be due 2-3 weeks after being assigned.
- Late submissions will be allowed up to two days after the original deadline, but may be abridged (e.g. due to the end of the semester).
Late submissions will be penalized 1% per hour (rounded up).
- See Gradescope for specific due dates and late submission deadlines.

### Discussions

- Discussion sections will focus on hands-on practice with concepts covered in lectures.
- At the end of each discussion section, you will have to submit your code and answer questions about the exercise in Gradescope.

## Course Assessment

- Homeworks: 25%
- Projects: 40%
- Discussions: 35%

## Student Code of Conduct

All students are expected to abide by University conduct policies as detailed in the following links:

* [Boston University Student Codes of Conduct](https://www.bu.edu/policies/policy-category/student-codes-condcut/)
* [College of Arts & Sciences Codes of Conduct](https://www.bu.edu/cas/academics/undergraduate-education/academic-conduct-code/resources-for-students/)
* [Boston University Student Responsibilities](https://www.bu.edu/dos/policies/student-responsibilities/)

## Academic Honesty

You may discuss homework assignments with classmates, but you are solely responsible for what you turn in. Collaboration
in the form of discussion is allowed, but all forms of cheating (copying parts of a classmate’s assignment, plagiarism
from books or old posted solutions) are NOT allowed. We – both teaching staff and students – are expected to abide by the
guidelines and rules of the [Academic Code of Conduct](which is at http://www.bu.edu/academics/policies/academic-conduct-code/).

Graduate students must also be aware of and abide by the [GRS Academic Conduct code](http://www.bu.edu/cas/students/graduate/forms-policies-procedures/academic-discipline-procedures/).

You can probably, if you try hard enough, find solutions for homework problems online. Given the nature of the Internet,
this is inevitable. Let me make a couple of comments about that:

1. If you are looking online for an answer because you don’t know how to start thinking about a problem, talk to the TA
   or instructor, who may be able to give you pointers to get you started. Piazza is great for this – you can usually
   get an answer in an hour if not a few minutes.
2. If you are looking online for an answer because you want to see if your solution is correct, ask yourself if there is
   some way to verify the solution yourself. Usually, there is. You will understand what you have done much better if
   you do that. So ... it would be better to simply submit what you have at the deadline (without going online to cheat)
   and plan to allocate more time for homeworks in the future.

## <a id="gaia-policy"></a>Generative AI Assistance (GAIA) Policy

In general, we follow the policy outlined in the
[CDS GAIA Policy](https://www.bu.edu/cds-faculty/culture-community/gaia-policy/).

Extracting and paraphrasing from the student responsibilities of that policy. 
Where there is conflicting information between the CDS policy and below, the
policy below should take precedence.

Students shall:<br>
1. Give credit to AI tools whenever used, even if only to generate ideas rather than usable text, illustrations or code.
2. When using AI tools on _written_ assignments, unless prohibited, add an appendix showing
    1. the entire exchange, highlighting the most relevant sections; 
    2. a description of precisely which AI tools were used (e.g. ChatGPT private subscription version or DALL-E free
        version), 
    3. an explanation of how the AI tools were used (e.g. to generate ideas, turns of phrase, elements of text, long
        stretches of text, lines of argument, pieces of evidence, maps of conceptual territory, illustrations of key
        concepts, etc.); 
    4. an account of why AI tools were used (e.g. to save time, to surmount writer’s block, to stimulate thinking, to
       handle mounting stress, to clarify prose, to translate text, to experiment for fun, etc.).
    5. Optional but recommended: Employ AI detection tools and originality checks prior to submission, ensuring that
       their submitted work is not mistakenly flagged.
3. When using AI tools on _coding_ assignments, unless prohibited
    1. Add the prompt text and tool used as comments before the generated code.
       Clarify whether the code was used as is, or modified somewhat, moderately
       or significantly.
4. Not use AI tools during in-class examinations, or assignments, unless explicitly permitted and instructed.
5. Use AI tools wisely and intelligently, aiming to deepen understanding of subject matter and to support learning.

As these generative assistive tools become widely deployed and pervasive, we believe they will become integral
to most people's workflow. However, for foundational concepts, as are taught in this course, it is in your
best interest and worth it to struggle some in creating your answers and solutions. It is just as important
to learn what doesn't work, and which paths are dead ends, as it is to learn what does work. When you are posed
with new and unique problems, that intuition you develop will be vital in choosing directions. More pragmatically,
some of the most coveted jobs at the most selective companies require technical interviews where they expect you
to know these foundational concepts without assistance.

And finally, to reiterate, it is vitally important, and a core part of academic integrity, to cite when you are
using Generative AI Assistive technologies. Arguably, not citing and risking plagiarism is worse than taking
short cuts and using and then citing GAIA.

## Accommodations for Students with Disabilities

If you have a disability and have an accommodations letter from the Disability & Access Services office, I encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with me as early in the semester as possible. I will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations but are not yet registered with BU Disability & Access Services, I encourage you to find more information at https://www.bu.edu/disability/.


_This <a href="static_files/syllabus.pdf">syllabus</a> provides a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary depending on the progress of the class._

Commit message:

change grade weights and assignment instructions

index.md, after:

---
layout: home
---

* TOC
{:toc}

<br>

## Personnel and Logistics

**Lectures (A1):** Tuesdays and Thursdays, 3:30pm -- 4:45pm<br>
**Location:** STH B19 (745 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A2:** Fridays, 10:10pm -- 11:00am<br>
**Location:** IEC B10 (888 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A3:** Fridays, 11:15am -- 12:05pm<br>
**Location:** MUG 205 (771 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A4:** Fridays, 12:20pm -- 1:10pm<br>
**Location:** CGS 315 (871 Commonwealth Ave)

**Discussion Session A5:** Fridays, 1:25pm -- 2:15pm<br>
**Location:** CGS 315 (871 Commonwealth Ave)

**Instructor(s):**
{% for person in site.data.people.instructors %}
- {{ person.name }}{% if person.email %} ({{ person.email }}){% endif %}
  {% if person.office %}- Office: {{ person.office }}{% endif %}
  {% if person.office_hours %}- Office Hours: {{ person.office_hours }}{% endif %}
{% endfor %}

**Teaching Assistants:**
{% for person in site.data.people.teaching_assistants %}
- {{ person.name }}{% if person.email %} ({{ person.email }}){% endif %}
  {% if person.office %}- Office: {{ person.office }}{% endif %}
  {% if person.office_hours %}- Office Hours: {{ person.office_hours }}{% endif %}
{% endfor %}

**Course Assistants:**
{% for person in site.data.people.course_assistants %}
- {{ person.name }}{% if person.email %} ({{ person.email }}){% endif %}
  {% if person.office %}- Office: {{ person.office }}{% endif %}
  {% if person.office_hours %}- Office Hours: {{ person.office_hours }}{% endif %}
{% endfor %}



## Course Description

In this course students will gain an understanding of the fundamentals in deep learning and then apply those concepts in exercises and applications in python. We’ll start with the origins of artificial neural networks, learn about loss functions, understand gradient descent, back propagation and various training optimization techniques. Students will be familiar with canonical network architecture such as multi-layer perceptions, convolutional neural networks, recursive neural networks, LSTMs and GRU, attention and transformers. Through explanations, examples and exercises students will build intuition on how deep learning algorithms work and how they are implemented in popular deep learning frameworks such as PyTorch. Students will be able to define, train and evaluate deep learning models as well as adapt deep learning frameworks to new functionality.  Students will gain exposure to pre-trained large language models and other foundation models and the concepts of few-shot learning and reasoning. Finally, students will be able to apply many of the techniques they learned in a final class project.

## Learning Outcomes

Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:

1. Grasp foundational theories and practices in the deep learning arena.
2. Design and implement various neural network architectures using Python and PyTorch.
3. Employ regularization, optimization, and advanced training techniques to enhance model performance.
4. Analyze real-world datasets, applying suitable deep learning techniques to derive actionable insights.
5. Understand the benefits and drawbacks of various neural architectures in specific contexts.
6. Understand the pros and cons of pre-trained large language and other foundation models and how best to employ them
7. Complete a data-centric project, showcasing end-to-end deep learning implementation.

## Prerequisites
Python Programming – Should be proficient in python and associated data science packages,
or studiously working towards proficiency. See for example
[Scientific Python Lectures](https://lectures.scientific-python.org/index.html) for lessons on python language and relevant packages, or
[The Python Tutorial](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/index.html) for a tutorial on the core
language. 

Packages such as NumPy [NumPy - Learn](https://numpy.org/learn/)  and 
SciPy ([SciPy User Guide](https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/tutorial/index.html#user-guide)
have tutorials and documentation as well. 

The more proficient you are, the more effective you will be at the assignments and projects. We will dedicate some discussion sessions to ensure your environment is setup correctly and review some of the basics as well as answer any questions.

Math Proficiency – In order to understand the foundational concepts, it is important to have proficiency in a number of areas of mathematics. These include linear algebra, first year calculus and trigonometry as well as some concepts from Real Analysis. We will cover these concepts in the class and some recitation sessions, but refreshing or building your foundation will help.

## Reference Material

The primary textbook for this course will be 
[Understanding Deep Learning](https://udlbook.github.io/udlbook/), by Simon Prince . 
The book is available online as a preprint and should be available in print from 
MIT Press in early 2024.

We’ll also reference 
[Introduction to Linear Algebra, Sixth Edition (2023)](https://math.mit.edu/~gs/linearalgebra/ila6/indexila6.html), by Gilbert Strang.

Lecture notes, consisting primarily of Jupyter notebooks will be posted online as well. 

Given the fast moving nature of this area, we’ll also be citing many articles available online as well as other online reference materials in each lecture. As part of the class, we will guide the students in constructing their own bibliography and give tips on how to efficiently and effectively read research papers.

## Computing Environment

Students are of course free to use their own personal computer, but you will also have access to Boston University’s Shared Computing Cluster and GPUs. Access instructions will be provided. For more information, see:
* [Shared Computing Cluster : TechWeb : Boston University](https://www.bu.edu/tech/support/research/computing-resources/scc/) 
* [GPU Computing : TechWeb : Boston University](https://www.bu.edu/tech/support/research/software-and-programming/programming/multiprocessor/gpu-computing/)

## Learning Management Software

* [Piazza]({{ site.data.urls["piazza"].url }})
* [Gradescope]({{ site.data.urls["gradescope"].url }})

## Course Requirements

### Homework, Projects and Pre-Work Reflections

- There will be a homework to kick off the semester as a refresher on some prerequisite concepts.
- For most of the course, there will be biweekly projects to implement the bigger concepts covered in lecture and build deeper hands-on experience.
Projects will be due ~2 weeks after being assigned.
- Late submissions will be allowed up to two days after the original deadline, but may be abridged (e.g. due to the end of the semester).
Late submissions will be penalized by 20%.
- See Gradescope for specific due dates and late submission deadlines.
- There will also be pre-class reflections based on the reading assignment for each lecture. These will be graded for participation, not for content.

### Discussions

- Discussion sections will focus on hands-on practice with concepts covered in lectures.
- You will have to submit your code and answer questions about the exercise in Gradescope by the end of the day of the discussion.
- You may submit up to 48 hours late with a 20% penalty.

## Course Assessment

- Homeworks and Pre-Work Reflections: 15%
- Projects: 70%
- Discussions: 15%

## Student Code of Conduct

All students are expected to abide by University conduct policies as detailed in the following links:

* [Boston University Student Codes of Conduct](https://www.bu.edu/policies/policy-category/student-codes-condcut/)
* [College of Arts & Sciences Codes of Conduct](https://www.bu.edu/cas/academics/undergraduate-education/academic-conduct-code/resources-for-students/)
* [Boston University Student Responsibilities](https://www.bu.edu/dos/policies/student-responsibilities/)

## Academic Honesty

You may discuss homework assignments with classmates, but you are solely responsible for what you turn in. Collaboration
in the form of discussion is allowed, but all forms of cheating (copying parts of a classmate’s assignment, plagiarism
from books or old posted solutions) are NOT allowed. We – both teaching staff and students – are expected to abide by the
guidelines and rules of the [Academic Code of Conduct](which is at http://www.bu.edu/academics/policies/academic-conduct-code/).

Graduate students must also be aware of and abide by the [GRS Academic Conduct code](http://www.bu.edu/cas/students/graduate/forms-policies-procedures/academic-discipline-procedures/).

You can probably, if you try hard enough, find solutions for homework problems online. Given the nature of the Internet,
this is inevitable. Let me make a couple of comments about that:

1. If you are looking online for an answer because you don’t know how to start thinking about a problem, talk to the TA
   or instructor, who may be able to give you pointers to get you started. Piazza is great for this – you can usually
   get an answer in an hour if not a few minutes.
2. If you are looking online for an answer because you want to see if your solution is correct, ask yourself if there is
   some way to verify the solution yourself. Usually, there is. You will understand what you have done much better if
   you do that. So ... it would be better to simply submit what you have at the deadline (without going online to cheat)
   and plan to allocate more time for homeworks in the future.

## <a id="gaia-policy"></a>Generative AI Assistance (GAIA) Policy

In general, we follow the policy outlined in the
[CDS GAIA Policy](https://www.bu.edu/cds-faculty/culture-community/gaia-policy/).

Extracting and paraphrasing from the student responsibilities of that policy. 
Where there is conflicting information between the CDS policy and below, the
policy below should take precedence.

Students shall:<br>
1. Give credit to AI tools whenever used, even if only to generate ideas rather than usable text, illustrations or code.
2. When using AI tools on _written_ assignments, unless prohibited, add an appendix showing
    1. the entire exchange, highlighting the most relevant sections; 
    2. a description of precisely which AI tools were used (e.g. ChatGPT private subscription version or DALL-E free
        version), 
    3. an explanation of how the AI tools were used (e.g. to generate ideas, turns of phrase, elements of text, long
        stretches of text, lines of argument, pieces of evidence, maps of conceptual territory, illustrations of key
        concepts, etc.); 
    4. an account of why AI tools were used (e.g. to save time, to surmount writer’s block, to stimulate thinking, to
       handle mounting stress, to clarify prose, to translate text, to experiment for fun, etc.).
    5. Optional but recommended: Employ AI detection tools and originality checks prior to submission, ensuring that
       their submitted work is not mistakenly flagged.
3. When using AI tools on _coding_ assignments, unless prohibited
    1. Add the prompt text and tool used as comments before the generated code.
       Clarify whether the code was used as is, or modified somewhat, moderately
       or significantly.
4. Not use AI tools during in-class examinations, or assignments, unless explicitly permitted and instructed.
5. Use AI tools wisely and intelligently, aiming to deepen understanding of subject matter and to support learning.

As these generative assistive tools become widely deployed and pervasive, we believe they will become integral
to most people's workflow. However, for foundational concepts, as are taught in this course, it is in your
best interest and worth it to struggle some in creating your answers and solutions. It is just as important
to learn what doesn't work, and which paths are dead ends, as it is to learn what does work. When you are posed
with new and unique problems, that intuition you develop will be vital in choosing directions. More pragmatically,
some of the most coveted jobs at the most selective companies require technical interviews where they expect you
to know these foundational concepts without assistance.

And finally, to reiterate, it is vitally important, and a core part of academic integrity, to cite when you are
using Generative AI Assistive technologies. Arguably, not citing and risking plagiarism is worse than taking
short cuts and using and then citing GAIA.

## Accommodations for Students with Disabilities

If you have a disability and have an accommodations letter from the Disability & Access Services office, I encourage you to discuss your accommodations and needs with me as early in the semester as possible. I will work with you to ensure that accommodations are provided as appropriate. If you suspect that you may have a disability and would benefit from accommodations but are not yet registered with BU Disability & Access Services, I encourage you to find more information at https://www.bu.edu/disability/.


_This <a href="static_files/syllabus.pdf">syllabus</a> provides a general plan for the course; deviations may be necessary depending on the progress of the class._
